Foreign Secretary Vikram Misri abused on social media; IAS, IPS associations come out in support
Vikram Misri had to lock his X account following abusive comments on his daughter by users who blamed him for the cessation of military operations agreed with Pakistan. The IAS Association condemns the “unwarranted personal attacks on civil servants performing their duties with integrity”
Updated - May 12, 2025 07:51 am IST - New Delhi

The Hindu Bureau
Foreign Secretary Vikram Misri briefs the media as Pakistan violates the ceasefire again after the India-Pak ceasefire agreement, in New Delhi on Saturday.
Foreign Secretary Vikram Misri briefs the media as Pakistan violates the ceasefire again after the India-Pak ceasefire agreement, in New Delhi on Saturday. | Photo Credit: ANI

After Foreign Secretary Vikram Misri was subjected to vicious trolling on social media on Sunday (May 11, 2025) for announcing on government’s behalf a day ago that India and Pakistan have agreed for cessation of military operations, the IAS Association came out in solidarity against the “unwarranted personal attacks” against the officer.

Follow India-Pakistan ceasefire updates on May 12

The Indian Administrative Service (IAS) Association posted on X that it stands in solidarity with Mr. Misri and his family. “Unwarranted personal attacks on civil servants performing their duties with integrity are deeply regrettable. We reaffirm our commitment to uphold the dignity of public service,” the Association posted on X.

The Indian Police Service (IPS) Association also condemned the personal attacks on Mr. Misri. “Unequivocally condemn the deplorable personal attacks against Foreign Secretary Shri Vikram Misri and his family. Such unwarranted assaults on civil servants committed to their duties are absolutely intolerable,” the IPS Association posted on X.

 Pakistan will have to pay a very heavy price if it resorts to any misadventure, says DGMO

Mr. Misri’s personal account on X was subjected to vulgar comments by users who blamed him for the agreement with Pakistan.

The officer had to lock his public account following the abusive comments about his daughter.

 Prolonging military conflict with Pakistan is not India's biggest priority today: Shashi Tharoor

AIMIM president and Hyderabad Member of Parliament Asaduddin Owaisi said on X, “Our civil servants work under the Executive this must be remembered & they shouldn’t be blamed for the decisions taken by The Executive /or any Political leadership running Watan E Aziz.”

Congress leader Sachin Pilot condemned the social media trolling directed at the family of the Foreign Secretary.

“It’s unacceptable to target our professional diplomats and civil servants — those who work dedicatedly to serve the nation,” Mr. Pilot said on X.

 Operation Sindoor objectives achieved; losses are part of combat but pilots are back home, says IAF

Congress Deputy Leader in Lok Sabha Gaurav Gogoi said that Mr. Misri did his duty impeccably, adding, “There is absolutely no reason for anyone to feel malice towards him. He has only conveyed the message that the political leadership of India has taken.”

V. Srinivas, Secretary, Department of Administrative Reforms and Public Grievances (DARPG), also expressed solidarity with his batchmate. “Vikram Misri is amongst India’s most celebrated Diplomats, has always epitomised the best values of service above self and Nation First approach, I express my solidarity with him,” Mr. Srinivas posted on X.